Introduction
There are many different models of turbojet engines in the Air Force today. Developments over the years have produced a more efficient engine, both from a performance and maintenance point of view. Modern engines are more complex, but they still operate according to the same basic principles as a car engine. The air needs to be sucked in, squeezed down, fuel added and ignited to get the bang, and blow out the exhaust gasses. A jet engine does it with a linear flow design instead of pistons moving up and down. In this unit you will learn about the major sections which are universal to all turbojet engines. 
INFORMATION: Engine System
Terms and Operating Principles
Physic principles govern the action of matter, motion, force, and energy. An English scientist, Sir Isaac Newton, stated three laws of motion. His third law states that “for every acting force (action) there is an equal and opposite reacting force (reaction). This law is used to explain the principle of Conservation of Momentum. These laws and principles have words or terms with specific meanings.
Mass is anything that occupies space and has weight
Air Density is the amount of air mass in a given space
Acceleration means the increase in velocity or speed
Thrust is the power produced by a jet engine that drives an aircraft forward and is measured in pounds

Operating Principles
Momentum is the mass of something multiplied by how it is accelerated. A jet engine uses this idea by taking a mass of air into the front at a slow speed and pushes the same mass of air out of the back a lot faster. Because the momentum going into the front of the engine is a lot smaller than that coming out the back, the engine generates forward trust thanks to physics i.e., conservation of momentum (e.g., action/reaction). 
A jet engine uses two key principles, the Venturi Effect and the Ideal Gas Law to accomplish the forward thrust. If you have a rigid tube with one end larger than the other, what goes into the system must still come out. This is like a garden hose when you squeeze the end of it, the same amount of water must come out of the hose even when you make the opening smaller, therefore the water coming out must travel faster. This is called the Venturi Effect and is why a jet engine is big in the front and very small in the middle.
The Ideal Gas Law relates temperature to the pressure, volume and amount of air. The hotter a gas is, the more volume it takes up or the bigger it appears. Putting this together with the Conservation of Momentum the air can now start working on how to go faster. At the front of the engine there is a fan and compressor which sucks in air and compresses it increasing the mass of the air in the engine but keeping the intake velocity low. The air is then ignited with the help of some fuel and expands in size/volume. The same air mass going into the engine must leave it as well, but because it takes up more space or volume, it must travel a lot faster meaning we increase velocity.

Compressor Section
The compressor section is the first section common to all jet engines. The primary function of the compressor is to supply air with enough quantity to satisfy the requirements of the combustion section. Specifically, the compressor increases the air pressure of the air mass received from the inlet duct and directs it to the combustion section (burners) in the quantity and at the pressure required. As the air is compressed, its temperature increases; increase can be as high as 900° Fahrenheit. 
The group of rotating “rotor” blades attached to a rotating shaft is what creates the suction (air flow) to pull the air in and move it rearward. The stationary “stator” blades located behind each of the rotor blades straighten the airflow and direct it to the next stage of rotor/stator blades. Combining one row of rotor blades and one row of stator blades creates one stage of compression.

Combustion Section
The hot compressed air leaving the compressor section enters into the combustion section of the engine where it is mixed with fuel and ignited (i.e., Ideal Gas Law). Burning the fuel/air mixture produces gaseous energy which then causes the air to expand rapidly and be expelled rearward.

Turbine Section
Directly after the combustion section is the engine’s turbine section. The turbine and compressor sections are linked by the turbine shaft. In this section, each row of stator blades/vanes increases the velocity of the air mass onto the rotor blades/vanes to convert the gaseous energy exiting the combustion section into mechanical energy. This is where your plane of rotation markings will be located. Therefore, the turbine transforms a portion of the kinetic (velocity) energy of the exhaust gasses into mechanical energy that is transferred to the turbine shaft to drive the compressor and accessory sections.

Exhaust Section
The exhaust section directs the flow of hot gasses rearward as it leaves the turbine, and accelerates the gasses being discharged from the exhaust nozzle at the rear of the exhaust duct. The nozzle opening and size are critical in regard to gas flow out of the engine; changing its size and length determines how much or how little thrust is produced by the engine.

Non-augmented exhaust
This type of exhaust is the simplest to understand. It uses a fixed (non-moveable) exhaust nozzle to direct the air mass from the engine and thrust the aircraft forward. This is most commonly seen on aircraft using the high-bypass turbofan engine.

Augmented exhaust
In its standard configuration, the gas turbine engine cannot meet certain demanded maneuvering performance levels. An additional component, the augmenter, provides that demanded increase in thrust to the aircraft over short periods of time. The augmenter mixes the exhaust of bypassed air and turbine exhaust gas into one exhaust. Additional fuel injectors are located downstream of the turbine blades which can be ignited to increase temperature significantly, resulting in a steep increase in engine net thrust. This is called the afterburner and the more sophisticated augmented exhaust design uses a variable (flexible) exhaust nozzle.to achieve that steep increase.

Accessory Section
The accessory section of the engine has various functions. The primary function is to provide space for the mounting of accessories necessary for the operation and control of the engine. It also includes accessories such as a constant speed drive, integrated drive generators, fluid power pumps, system monitoring components, and various engine control devices. The secondary purpose includes acting as an oil reservoir, oil sump, and providing for transmittal of initial rotating force from starter to the turbine shaft. The accessory section is driven by the turbine shaft in the compressor section geared to a Power Take-off (PTO) drive shaft (tower shaft) gear coupling, which splines with the gearbox.

Turbofan Engines
The term “turbofan” stands for “turbine” and “fan,” the “turbine” part represents a gas turbine that obtains mechanical power through combustion, and the “fan” part represents a ducted fan that utilizes the gas turbine’s mechanical power to accelerate the air backward. The fan of the turbofan draws excess power from the exhaust gases through the turbine by way of the turbine shaft. Simply put, the "turbine" and "fan" rely on each other to make the whole operation work. Turbofan engines can be broken into two basic types: High Bypass Fan and Low Bypass Fan. There is no technical difference between the two except the amount of air being bypassed around the core of the engine. There is either a high amount of air or a low amount of air that is bypassed through the duct.

High Bypass Fan
An engine whose fan thrust is much larger than the jet thrust is called a high bypass fan. The air sucked inside the engine via the fan is divided into two paths. One enters the engine core where combustion takes place while the remaining part of the air (bypass air) moves outside of the engine core. This bypassed air creates the thrust for the aircraft, cools the engine, and calms it down by removing the engine exhaust gases. The engine’s core must produce adequate energy to run the fan based on fuel throttle position. To improve fuel consumption and reduce noise, almost all larger aircraft utilize this type because they do not need to accelerate quickly or to fly at Mach speed (760 mph).

Low Bypass Fan
Low-bypass engines develop most of their thrust from air that enters through the fan and used by the combustion section of the engine. After leaving the turbine, the remaining pressure forces the hot gasses through the engine’s augmented exhaust duct at very high speeds. The air that entered the inlet is now expelled at a much higher speed than when it entered. This produces the engine thrust. The small amount of bypassed air around the core engine is used for engine cooling and augmenter operations. This engine is commonly used in fighter aircraft for rapid increases in thrust for flight operations that include takeoff, climb, missile evasion, combat maneuvers such as high-G turns (high gravity turn) and to fly above Mach speeds.

Turboprop engine
The turboprop gas turbine engine is similar to a turbofan except the duct enclosed axial flow fan is replaced with a gearbox and propeller which are connected to the front of the compressor with an extension shaft. The shaft drives the propeller through the reduction gearbox assembly.

Components unique to turboprop engines
The reduction gearbox assembly changes the high Revolutions per Minute (RPM)/low torque of the turbine section to the low RPM/high torque necessary for efficient propeller operation. The reduction gear case also provides the drive and location to mount the propeller and accessories. Accessories mounted on the case include a starter, generator, engine-driven compressor, oil pump, and tachometer generator. An array of different diameter gears inside of the reduction gear assembly accepts the high-speed/low-torque output delivered from the engine via the extension shaft and converts it to the necessary low-speed/high-torque to turn the propeller at its most efficient speed.
The extension shaft assembly transmits the high-speed/low-torque output of the engine to the reduction gear assembly. This extension shaft assembly also contains a torque-meter assembly to monitor the amount of power output. A signal from each torque-meter assembly is transmitted to gauge in the flight deck to indicate to the pilot power output of each engine. 
The turboprop propeller is operated by a jet engine through a reduction gear assembly. The turboprop fuel control and the propeller governor are connected and operate in coordination with each other. The power lever directs a signal from the cockpit to the fuel control for a specific amount of power from the engine. The fuel control and the propeller governor together establish the correct combination of RPM, fuel flow, and propeller blade angle to create sufficient propeller thrust to provide the desired power.

SUMMARY
The same basic operating principle applies to all Turbojet engines, action/reaction. The sections that make up the engines are compressor, combustion, turbine, exhaust and accessory. The type of Turbojet engine used depends on the aircraft design and function. Turbofans have a bypass duct for either fuel efficiency (high bypass) or speed (low bypass). The turboprop is used to for turning high RPM/low torque into low RPM/high torque which allows the aircraft to take off or land on much shorter runway strips and stop very quickly.
